# Introduction

This paper is inspired by \[[N3655](#ref-N3655)\], section 3 of which
was adopted at WG21’s 2013 Bristol meeting. That section provided (as
did its predecessor \[[N3546](#ref-N3546)\]) template aliases for the
result of *metafunctions* in `<type_traits>`. However, the broader
question of analogous template aliases throughout the remainder of the
standard library was not addressed.

This paper recommends a systematic guideline to steer future WG21
decisions in deciding when a *metafunction-name*\_**t** template alias
should accompany a standard library *metafunction*. After applying this
recommended guideline to the entire C++14 standard library, we conclude
that `tuple_element_t` is the only missing alias. We then propose
wording (a) to remedy this lack and (b) to take advantage of the
proposed remedy. Finally, we also present an alternative guideline and
its implications, and provide justifications for favoring the
recommended guideline.

# Motivation and Scope

\[[N3655](#ref-N3655)\] provided the motivation for the existence of the
`_t` template aliases. The goal of this paper is to introduce a
guideline for WG21 to systematically decide when a *metafunction* in the
standard library should be accompanied by a *metafunction-name*\_**t**
template alias. Specifically, we want to ensure that future standard
library *metafunctions* stay consistent with those we currently have.

The proposed guideline is the following:

> A class template should be accompanied by a *metafunction-name*\_**t**
> template alias if it provides a public member `type` named type and no
> other accessible members.

An exhaustive search through the text of \[[N3797](#ref-N3797)\] reveals
that the only class templates that meet the above guideline are the
following:

  - *TransformationTraits* from section 3 of \[[N3655](#ref-N3655)\].
  - `tuple_element`

Since `tuple_element_t` is the only missing template alias, we propose
to add it.

# Impact on the Standard

This proposal is a pure library extension. It does not require any new
language features, it is merely an extension of an existing practice
adopted from \[[N3655](#ref-N3655)\].

# Proposed Wording

Add to `<tuple>` synopsis of \[[N3797](#ref-N3797)\]:

``` diff
// 20.4.2.5: tuple helper classes:
+template <size_t I, class T>
+using tuple_element_t = typename tuple_element <I, T>::type;
```

The definition of `get` functions in **§20.3.4**, and **§20.4.2.6** of
\[[N3797](#ref-N3797)\] can be simplified as follows\[1\]:

``` diff
// 20.3.4: tuple-like access to pair:
template <size_t I, class T1, class T2>
-  constexpr typename tuple_element<I, std::pair<T1, T2> >::type&
+  constexpr tuple_element_t<I, pair<T1, T2> >&
-    get(std::pair<T1, T2>&) noexcept;
+    get(pair<T1, T2>&) noexcept;

template <size_t I, class T1, class T2>
-  constexpr typename tuple_element<I, std::pair<T1, T2> >::type&&
+  constexpr tuple_element_t<I, pair<T1, T2> >&&
-    get(std::pair<T1, T2>&&) noexcept;
+    get(pair<T1, T2>&&) noexcept;

template <size_t I, class T1, class T2>
-  constexpr const typename tuple_element<I, std::pair<T1, T2> >::type&
+  constexpr const tuple_element_t<I, pair<T1, T2> >&
-    get(const std::pair<T1, T2>&) noexcept;
+    get(const pair<T1, T2>&) noexcept;

// 20.4.2.6, element access :
template <size_t I, class ... Types>
-  constexpr typename tuple_element<I, tuple<Types...> >::type&
+  constexpr tuple_element_t<I, tuple<Types...> >&
    get(tuple<Types...>&) noexcept;

template <size_t I, class ... Types>
-  constexpr typename tuple_element<I, tuple<Types...> >::type&&
+  constexpr tuple_element_t<I, tuple<Types...> >&&
    get(tuple<Types...>&&) noexcept;

template <size_t I, class ... Types>
-  constexpr typename tuple_element<I, tuple<Types...> >::type const&
+  constexpr const tuple_element_t<I, tuple<Types...> >&
    get(const tuple<Types...>&) noexcept;
```

# Design Decisions

We considered an alternative guideline:

> A class template should be accompanied by a *metafunction-name*\_**t**
> template alias if it provides a public member type named `type` and
> possibly other accessible members.

An exhaustive search through the text of \[[N3797](#ref-N3797)\] reveals
that the class templates that meet this alternative guideline are the
following:

  - `integral_constant`
      - *TransformationTraits* from section 4 of \[[N3655](#ref-N3655)\]
      - `is_bind_expression`
      - `is_error_code_enum`
      - `is_error_condition_enum`
      - `is_placeholder`
      - `ratio_equal`
      - `ratio_greater`
      - `ratio_greater_equal`
      - `ratio_less`
      - `ratio_less_equal`
      - `ratio_not_equal`
      - `tuple_size`
      - `uses_allocator`
  - `ratio`
  - `ratio_add`
  - `ratio_divide`
  - `ratio_multiply`
  - `ratio_subtract`
  - `reference_wrapper`

This guideline is overly accepting, because we are rarely interested in
the `type` member of these class templates. Consider `integral_constant`
along with all of the class templates listed under it which inherit from
`integral_constant`. The class member we are far more interested in for
these class templates is the `value` member. For `ratio`, and
**ratio**\_*operations*, the `type` member is simply a type alias for
itself, and `reference_wrapper`’s `type` member is nothing but an
identity type alias for `T`.

Also consider their intended use cases. All of **is**\_*property*,
**ratio**\_*compare*, and `uses_allocator` are intended for compile-time
boolean tests. `tuple_size` is intended to acquire the size of a
`tuple`. `integral_constant` is intended to capture a compile-time value
and is sometimes used for tagged dispatch. **ratio**\_*operations* are
used for compile-time rational arithmetic. `reference_wrapper` is simply
intended for containing references in our containers. The intended use
cases make it clear that these are not *metafunctions* that yield a type
as a result.

On the contrary, the proposed guideline captures the correct intended
use of the class templates. If the only member provided for a class
template is `type`, it is most likely a *metafunction* which yields a
type as a result. This categorization holds true for all of
*TransformationTraits* from section 3 of \[[N3655](#ref-N3655)\] and
`tuple_element`. For example, `add_const` is a *metafunction* which
yields a `const`-qualified version of the type as a result, and
`tuple_element` is a *metafunction* which yields the type that lies at a
specified index within a list of types as a result. Therefore providing
a template alias for such class templates will be useful for convenient
access to the `type` member.

# Acknowledgements

Thanks to Walter E. Brown for encouraging me to write this paper.

# References

<div id="refs" class="references">

<div id="ref-N3655">

\[N3655\] Walter E. Brown. 2013. TransformationTraits Redux, v2.   
<http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2013/n3655.pdf>

</div>

<div id="ref-N3546">

\[N3546\] Walter E. Brown. 2013. TransformationTraits Redux.   
<http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2013/n3546.pdf>

</div>

<div id="ref-N3797">

\[N3797\] Du ToitStefanus. 2013. Working Draft, Standard for Programming
Language C++.   
<http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2013/n3797.pdf>

</div>

</div>

1.  Note the removal of explicit `std::` namespace qualifiers and a
    standardized placement of `const` as a drive-by-fix.
