# Introduction

This paper proposes to allow visiting `variant`s with an explicitly
specified return type.

# Motivation and Scope

Variant visitation requires invocation of all combinations of
alternatives to result in the same type, such type is deduced as the
visitation return type. It is sometimes desirable to explicitly specify
a return type to which all the invocations are implicitly convertible
to, as if by *`INVOKE`*`<R>` rather than *`INVOKE`*:

``` cpp
struct process {
  template <typename I>
  auto operator()(I i) -> O<I> { /* ... */ };
};

std::variant<I1, I2> input = /* ... */;

// mapping from a `variant` of inputs to a `variant` of results:
auto output = std::visit<std::variant<O<I1>, O<I2>>>(process{}, input);

// coercing different results to a common type:
auto result = std::visit<std::common_type_t<O<I1>, O<I2>>>(process{}, input);

// visiting a `variant` for the side-effects, discarding results:
std::visit<void>(process{}, input);
```

In all of the above cases the return type deduction would have failed,
as each invocation yields a different type for each alternative.

# Impact on the Standard

This proposal is a pure library extension.

# Proposed Wording

Modify **§23.7.2 \[variant.syn\]** of \[[N4687](#ref-N4687)\] as
indicated:

``` diff
  // 23.7.7, visitation
  template <class Visitor, class... Variants>
    constexpr see below visit(Visitor&&, Variants&&...);
+  template <class R, class Visitor, class... Variants>
+    constexpr R visit(Visitor&&, Variants&&...);
```

Add new paragraphs to **§23.7.7 \[variant.visit\]** of
\[[N4687](#ref-N4687)\]:

> 
> 
>     template <class R, class Visitor, class... Variants>
>       constexpr R visit(Visitor&& vis, Variants&&... vars);
> 
> > *Requires*: The expression in the *Effects*: element shall be a
> > valid expression for all combinations of alternative types of all
> > variants. Otherwise, the program is ill-formed.
> > 
> > *Effects*: Let `is...` be `vars.index()...`. Returns
> > *`INVOKE`*`<R>(forward<Visitor>(vis),
> > get<is>(forward<Variants>(vars))...);`.
> > 
> > *Throws*: `bad_variant_access` if any `variant` in `vars` is
> > `valueless_by_exception()`.
> > 
> > *Complexity*: For `sizeof...(Variants) <= 1`, the invocation of the
> > callable object is implemented in constant time, i.e. it does not
> > depend on `sizeof...(Types)`. For `sizeof...(Variants) > 1`, the
> > invocation of the callable object has no complexity requirements.

# Design Decisions

There is a corner case for which the new overload could clash with the
existing overload. A call to `std::visit<Result>` actually performs
overload resolution with the following two candidates:

``` cpp
template <class Visitor, class... Variants>
constexpr decltype(auto) visit(Visitor&&, Variants&&...);

template <class R, class Visitor, class... Variants>
constexpr R visit(Visitor&&, Variants&&...);
```

The template instantiation via `std::visit<Result>` replaces `Visitor`
with `Result` for the first overload, `R` with `Result` for the second,
and we end up with the following:

``` cpp
template <class... Variants>
constexpr decltype(auto) visit(Result&&, Variants&&...);

template <class Visitor, class... Variants>
constexpr Result visit(Visitor&&, Variants&&...);
```

This results in an ambiguity if `Result&&` happens to be the same type
as `Visitor&&`. For example, a call to `std::visit<Vis>(Vis{});` would
be ambiguous since `Result&&` and `Visitor&&` are both `Vis&&`.

In general, we would first need a self-returning visitor, then an
invocation to `std::visit` with the same type **and** value category
specified for the return type **and** the visitor argument.

We claim that this problem is not worth solving considering the rarity
of such a use case and the complexity of a potential solution.

Finally, note that this is not a new problem since `bind` already uses
the same pattern to support `bind<R>`:

``` cpp
  template <class F, class... BoundArgs>
    unspecified bind(F&&, BoundArgs&&...);
  template <class R, class F, class... BoundArgs>
    unspecified bind(F&&, BoundArgs&&...);
```

# Implementation Experience

  - [`MPark.Variant`](https://github.com/mpark/variant) implements
    `visit<R>` as proposed in the
    [`visit-r`](https://github.com/mpark/variant/tree/visit-r) branch.
  - [`Eggs.Variant`](https://github.com/eggs-cpp/variant) has provided
    an implementation of `visit<R>` as `apply<R>` since 2014, and also
    handles the corner case mentioned in [Design
    Decisions](#design-decisions).

# Future Work

There are other similar facilities that currently use *`INVOKE`*, and do
not provide an accompanying overload that uses *`INVOKE`*`<R>`. Some
examples are `std::invoke`, `std::apply`, and `std::async`.

There may be room for a paper with clear guidelines as to if/when such
facilities should have an accompanying overload.

# References

<div id="refs" class="references">

<div id="ref-N4687">

\[N4687\] 2017. Working Draft, Standard for Programming Language C++.   
<http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2017/n4687.pdf>

</div>

</div>
